feat: :sparkles: how-to guide on doing domain-driven design (#94)
seedcase-project/guidebook: workflows/software.qmd

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be added to the `_quarto.yml` as well?

you need to do is to clearly define the purpose and need for the
software. The purpose doesn't have to be very detailed or specific at
this point, but there needs to be one. At the least, there needs to be a
clear need or a specific problem to be solved by software.

If you don't have this clear purpose, everything later will be much
harder. In general, don't continue to the next steps unless you have
this purpose. Instead, wait until that clear purpose and need comes up.
It's better to not waste time on building something that doesn't
actually solve any problems or needs. There's more than enough real
problems in the world to actually spend time on.

This purpose can come from you, your team, your organisation, or from
users or clients. Either way, it takes a bit of time and effort to dig
into what the actual purpose and need is. It's difficult to describe how
you can go about this process as it involves a lot of human
communication, discussion, clarification, and understanding. In general,
ask lots of questions and listen without or as little judgement or
assumptions as possible.

### Using domain-driven design

> Once you have the clear purpose, now you can get into designing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have the clear purpose, you can get into designing
```

something! Like the step above, this step involves a substantial amount
of listening, asking probing questions, digging deeper into the problem
domain, and communication. Among the best tools to use for this
step are plain sticky notes, pencils/pens, whiteboards, and paper.

Domain-driven design starts having at least one, though usually more,
brainstorming/workshop-like sessions. Participants of these sessions
include domain experts (those actually working in the problem area),
relevant stakeholders, developers, and users. The goal of these sessions
is to identify, decompose, record, and sketch out all the different
events, actions, processes, workflows, and tasks that are involved in
the problem domain. Think of these as the "nouns" and "verbs" of the
problem area.

Rarely do you identify everything in a given area of the problem the
first time you focus on it. So within each session, have multiple rounds

> of brainstorming and questioning and examining any given area until you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of brainstorming and questioning, and examine any given area until you
```

feel like you've fully explored it.

How this might look in practice depends a lot on the specific problem
domain and context. But in general you might follow this sequence of
rounds:

1.  Start with the beginning and the end of the problem area. What is
    the very first inputs and what are the final outputs?
2.  Working from either end, start identifying all major events (the
    "nouns") and the actions (the "verbs") that happen in between the
    start and end. Focus on events and actions that people actually have
    to do or take, including any manual, non-computer tasks.
3.  For each event and action, dig in deeper and identify sub-events and
    sub-actions. This is where asking questions and "why" or "how" can
    help immensely. A good way to think about this is the ["5
    Whys"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_whys) (ask why five times)
    or the "explain like I'm five" (ELI5) technique. Don't assume
    things, ask simple questions (even if you may think you know the

>     answer). You'll be surprised how often you find new things this way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    answer). You'll be surprised how often you find out new things this way.
```

4.  For any area that is unclear or uncertain, make a note of that to
    come back to it or to investigate it further later.
5.  Keep repeating this process until everyone agrees with what's been
    (un)covered and there are no major gaps or missing pieces. In
    reality, as you continue this design stage, there will be areas
    missing that weren't identified during these sessions.

Once you've gotten through this process, now is the time to organise it
into a coherent narrative and structure. A good starting point is to
make a diagram, such as a [C4 Model

> diagram](https://c4model.com/) or even a simple flowchart will do, to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
diagram](https://c4model.com/) or even a simple flowchart, to
```

visually represent the overall architecture and flow of the system, such
as how events and actions connect to each other. From there, convert all

> the "nouns" into objects or data structures, as relevant to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the "nouns" into objects or data structures, as appropriate for the
```

programming language you're using and "verbs" as functions or methods
(along with their signature of parameters). For example, create Python
classes that map to those events you identified earlier and functions

> for the actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
classes that map to the events you identified earlier and functions
that map to the actions.
```

Usually, but not always, a "noun" has an "verb" before or after it. For
example, a "noun" or event might be created by an action or "verb". The
reverse can also happen, where a "noun" is used by a "verb" to create
another "noun". But sometimes, "nouns" may not have a preceding or
following "verb", and likewise with "verbs".

The output of these sessions, and the ultimate output of the
domain-driven design process, should be some type of design document
that you can refer to later. This is where you can use the [explanation
document type](https://diataxis.fr/explanation) from
[Diataxis](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org/why-diataxis/). As
much as possible, think of every stage of development as part of the
product, not as a separate thing. This design document should be
included as part of the software product's documentation, so treat it

> with the same level of care, attention, and quality as you would as any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the same level of care, attention, and quality as you would any
```

    you find out new things this way.
4.  For any area that is unclear or uncertain, make a note of it to come
    back to it and investigate it further later.
5.  Keep repeating this process until everyone agrees with what's been
    (un)covered and there are no major gaps or missing pieces. In
    reality, as you continue this design stage, there will be areas
    missing that weren't identified during these sessions.

Once you've gotten through this process, it's time to organise it into a
coherent narrative and structure. A good starting point is to make a
diagram, such as a [C4 Model diagram](https://c4model.com/) or even a
simple flowchart to visually represent the overall architecture and flow
of the system, such as how events and actions connect to each other.
From there, convert all the "nouns" or events into objects or data
structures, as appropriate for the programming language you're using,
and "verbs" into functions or methods (noting their signature). For
example, create Python classes that map to the events you identified
earlier and functions that map to the actions.

Usually, but not always, a "noun" has an "verb" before or after it. For

> example, a "noun" might be created by an action or "verb". The reverse

Reviewer 3: And for those of us that are challenged in the grammatical department an actual example would be good :-)

Author: There are examples at the end. Is that enough?
